this episode of Chatty versity has
brought to you by my new full chainmail
print t-shirts and pants as well as full
print hoodies and new shadow versity
t-shirts which are tunics chainmail like
hybrid prints they're awesome perfect
falafel just showing your medieval
enthusiasm to low you in a long-sleeve
one undershirt or the short sleeve on
just out here because it's awesome it is
a high detail historically accurate
riveted mail print made from real came
out itself and it's awesome so if you're
interested in grabbing yourself a set
there is a link in the description below
[Music]
greetings i'm chad and i have addressed
the katana in many videos on my channel
trying to dismiss the misconceptions but
also establish what is our eight
strengths vs us weaknesses and the
katana generally comes up where I got
casually in many different video topics
and then I have my full large katana
series but I've realized I don't have a
single video that addresses all the
misconceptions in one concise way which
is what I'm doing in this video right
now and if you want the deep dive well I
do have a five-part katana series which
goes into academic studies on the katana
metallurgical analysis and all that
stuff which is the proof it establishes
all the things I'm going to be sharing
here right now and I'll be trying to
explain these points that I'm going
through as best I can as concisely as I
can because you know me I never go off
on random tangents but anyway I do the
best I can and hopefully make this video
as a kind of a point of reference that
can be used to point towards I the this
is the truth about the katana so let me
say right off the bat that the katana is
one of my favorite sword okay I love
this thing a button thing is I want
things to be understood in their correct
context and so even though I love the
katana I hate that people misunderstand
it and they also put the katana on the
pedestal to make it seem like it's
better than every sword in the world
it's not okay the katana is not a
magical sword that is the best soil in
the world it is great at what it's meant
to do so when put in the correct context
of what the katana is made for what it
excels at it's great at that it doesn't
mean it is the best it I want cutting
the katana is a beasty cutter is the
best cutter in the world well I mean it
depends what makes a good cutting okay
if you made a sword that was
ridiculously top-heavy that you just
needed to drop it or what cut anything
well there you can say it's the best
color in the world but it would be
unruly and you won't be able to use it
okay
a sword needs to hit a specific balance
to be a really good sword a katana does
hit a decent balance but there are other
swords that can cut better than it okay
there are other swords that's are better
all there are swords that exceed it
certain other things that that just the
katana doesn't you know EXO it can
thrust but it's not the best thrust in
the world okay in terms of how new
bull it is and how easy you can redirect
the blade there other sorts that a far
more nimble then and okay so the first
thing that we need a understand and
heuristic Etana
is not a magical sort and it's not the
best sword in the world it is a great
sword at cutting and what it's meant to
do it's pretty rubbish against armor
okay and in a one-on-one jewel if you're
fighting someone with another sword it
has a lack of hair protection everything
I had but that's the first misconception
out of the gate is that it's not magical
it's not the best sword in the world
these next points I'm gonna elaborate on
further but I'm just gonna say quickly
is that the steel is not the best steel
in the world okay the katana it's not
the sharpest sword in the world it is
not the strongest sword in the world it
is not the lightest order in the world
it is not the most shock absorbing sword
in the world and this slight curve does
not increase cutting capacity all these
things that I just mentioned are things
that I've heard academics try and claim
about the katana and that it is better
in these qualities than any other sword
all of those things are incorrect and
I'm gonna explain why I'll start with
the metal and this is one of the most
misunderstood things about the katana
and it is usually the cause or reason
that people give as to why it is
stronger sharper Lysa and all these
things and it all comes back to that it
was folded 2,000 times because that
that's made it so incredibly strong in
people who say that if you fold steel
two thousand times it inherently makes
it better stronger sharper only things
honestly have no idea about
blacksmithing or metallurgy and I used
to say that it was the 40 like when I
was a teenager all I was I was fooled by
these documentaries and even pop-culture
that's because it's the folding that
doesn't an okay folding steel is only
necessary if the steel you are starting
with has impurities in it if the steel
you are starting with has the right
carbon content it's the right grade of
steel and it doesn't have impurities
folding that steel will make it worse
okay when you Forge something you
inherently lose carbon content to the
oxygen around all this making all the
heating all the scale the scale is the
steel oxidizing oxygen bonding with it
okay flaking off and when you fold it
not only do you have a chance of
trapping scale in the folds you are d
carburizing the steel and the more fold
you do into steel that has already got
the right carbon content the more carbon
you will lose which means you could
render it down back into iron
so folding steel does not inherently
make it better
what it does do it can remove impurities
how does folding steel it remove
impurities well this is one if you have
nonmetallic inclusions in this steel
they have a lower melting temperature
than this deal itself so when you heat
up this kind of block of steel to the
point where it isn't liquefied the
steels and look fiber is red-hot
well the nonmetallic inclusions have
liquefied and when you hammer them down
fold around and hammer it down you can
squeeze those little little pockets of
liquid nonmetallic inclusions out of the
steel and the more you do it the more
you fold it the more you squeeze it out
to the point we can actually pop em out
of the steel itself it does not remove
all the impurities in fact folding steel
like this it is impossible to remove all
those impurities you can get rid of the
larger pockets of impurities and a
decent amount so it does help purify the
steel and then the next thing the
impurities that you can't get rid of
because it's impossible to remove all
those impurities in this method you
homogenized those impurities uniformly
throughout the steel so that means when
you hammer it out into a long blade now
it means there's no one large pocket of
impurities that would cause a fatal
point where the blade will break it's
all uniform which means you can be very
assured that the strength of the sword
at this point is as strong as the sword
at this point next thing the folding
method on katana wasn't folded 2,000
times you can reach up to 2,000 layers
but you only need like 20 folds to get
there think about it one fold you've got
two layers two folds you have four
layers three folds you have eight layers
four folds you have 16 32 64 it goes up
okay so you can reach the glorious 2,000
layers but not two thousand fold so Kay
if you folded steel two thousand times
you'll probably render it down into iron
and ruin it so then why do they fold it
well it's because like I said the steel
they start with has a lot of impurities
in it and the method okay the actual
folding method is an ingenious method to
be able to take this lower quality steel
and it is lower quality okay now people
say tamahagane a the steel of a Claridge
may have is glorious no it's just high
carbon okay and especially with earlier
technology it could be difficult to make
higher carbon steel when you work didn't
understand the processes
perfect
okay but the Tatara they're big you know
a smelting thing that makes tamahagane a
that Tatara is in his most basic state a
large bloomery furnace and bloomery
steel has been known in many cultures
for thousands of years before the
medieval period even okay bloomer is
still it's how they started smelting
iron in the Classical period even with
the Romans okay bloomery forges has bit
has been known for ages the difference
between the Tatara
and other bloomery furnaces is that it's
big it's a big bloomery furnace but that
is it another thing that kind of proves
what I'm talking about okay is the metal
the big metal slab chunk thing that you
get out of the Tatara that's not all
tamahagane a they actually have to look
at it break off chunks of there's steel
that has the right carbon content why
because just it with any other bloomery
this is the whole thing about
preliminary furnaces it doesn't fully
liquify the iron and if the iron isn't
fully liquefying that means that the
carbon content can't diffuse evenly
through the iron to get perfectly
uniform high-quality steel as a result
the steel that you're going to get out
of it is going to have a lot of
nonmetallic inclusions and the carbon
content is not going to be diffused
uniformly and so what they do when they
have this big chunk of metal from the
Tatara they break it apart and they look
for the bits of steel that are shiny a
bit more silvery because the more
silvery it is the more carbon content it
has and then they actually look for what
is good at tamahagane a which is steel
that has the right carbon content break
it off into chunks and keep them
together this is why tamahagane a is
always in little chunks and they need to
be flattened out and put into this kind
of thing to be forged welded together
okay if it was a you know if the turret
made good quality steel they wouldn't
need to do that I would already you'll
get a puck out of it of good quality
uniform with no nonmetallic inclusions
so pure steel or the right carbon
content straight away you wouldn't need
a folder then to get rid of the
impurities and then you can just bash it
down into this length that you want
there are many types of steel that is
actually better than tamahagane either
steel that it makes the katana
traditionally because it's better
technology crucible steel okay if you
put steel into kind of a Cray clay
crucible put it in a I got
Ford firing of the right temperature so
much that you can actually liquefy the
iron you will diffuse the carbon in it
uniformly and you'll get a higher
quality steel as a result of the right
carbon content out of the gate if you
put this crucible in a furnace that can
get hot enough to the point where it
will fully liquify the iron the
impurities will naturally float to the
surface okay these are bits of like
glass silicon and only the other thing
about generally all these bits of rock
dirt and everything they melt and they
rise to the surface they float on top
and then the carbon gets fully diffused
evenly throughout it when the result is
a pocket gets diffuse evenly in the puck
and you get much better quality pure
steel as a result and guess what this is
technology that did exist in the
medieval period okay not everywhere in
the medieval period because the thing
people need I'm saying both and medieval
you know Europe and medieval era Japan
is that there was good quality and bad
quality but everyone always grabs the
best quality katanas do you know how
many crap quality katanas they were that
just would bend easily couldn't hold an
edge that didn't have the right carbon
content and we're closer to iron and
steel there were a lot more than people
realize okay sword quality historically
was always on a spectrum and the best
quality Smith's okay the best Smith's
would be able to make the best quality
ones and get paid more but there are a
lot of crappy ones out there okay and
people tend to like to compare the you
know best quality katana with the worst
quality European swords but Noah all
right if you want to compare best to
best you compare the best quality katana
against the best quality European into
swords and when you do that you're
looking at swords that were made out of
crucible steel that actually made out a
better steel having said that though the
differences in quality are very small in
all honesty in terms of the actual
strength and durability I what has a far
greater impact on the strength and
durability of a sword it's not
necessarily the steel as long as the
steel is decent okay and the steel that
you get the resulting steel that you get
out of the folding process on a katana
is decent and same with you know even
crystal seals like the differences
between a good crucible steel and the
steel that again the katana they're both
pretty good and I would say crucible
steel isn't fine naturally is better
because it has less impurities and it's
more uniform and all those things but
the differences between crucible steel
and katana you know traditional folded
steel are so small in regular use you
would barely notice it
okay you'll barely notice those strength
differences with you look if you could
very best the best okay so even though I
think the crucible steel is better you
wouldn't really notice the difference
the thing that causes a much larger
difference in its handling and
mechanical properties is the quenching
stage okay the quenching and tempering
stage now the quenching and tempering
stage is very important because that
actually gives the katana not only its
iconic curve but also its iconic hump is
it the Hammond Hammond line which is the
wavy pattern you see on katanas okay
because Tanner's traditionally wear them
when they're traditionally made how are
done through differential hardening
where they will make the edge harder
than the back this is in contrast to
most European methods of forging swords
in the year quenching and tempering
stage where they have a mono hardness is
not differential it's all the same
uniform throughout which is better
well there's pros and cons to both but
one has a massive advantage over the
other which I'm gonna get to you but
before I do that I want to address some
of the other misconceptions next coming
up which is that the katana is the
sharpest sword in the world and this is
related into the quenching and tempering
because the katana is quenched in such a
way where the edge is a lot harder they
put a thin layer of clay on the edge
thicker on the back and sew the edge
hardens quicker in the back which makes
the edge the crystalline structure the
metallurgical crystalline structure of
the edge martensite then they have a
pearlite which is another crystalline
structure which is not as hard as
martensite a pearlite kind of jacket
with a nearly ferrite or iron core as
the ferrite can sometimes have lines of
cementite and so it's a lower quality of
pearlite steel but most traditionally
made katanas have three types of
crystalline structure now as a result
you have a very hard edged Steel's that
are harder okay can hold their edges for
longer it doesn't mean they are
inherently sharper they just remain
sharper for longer you can sharpen up
crappy iron to be as sharp as a katana
it'll just lose the edge quicker that's
the difference now to the misconceptions
of the katana strength and shock
absorbency because this is directly
impacted by the differential hardening
that I was mentioning before people
assume that because the back edge of the
katana is not as hard as the actual edge
that somehow makes a shock absorber
and therefore resistant to chipping and
denting and breaking that's completely
incorrect in actual fact because that
the edge is so hard it's actually more
prone to cracks okay the harder
something gets the more prone or beads
to crack instead of just deform and
didn't okay so that's the first
misconception to break off and then
people assume that'll be resistant to
bending which is also completely
incorrect what differential hardening
will do and I'll come closer to the
camera is if you have a harder edge and
a softer back is that when you get a
crack or something that impacts them
because remember the edge is much harder
on a katana then the other parts of the
sword when a crack happens and it
reaches the part of the blade that's
softer and there's a really soft
internal core on most katanas which is
closer to ferrite and then this outer
kind of side jacket here is a pearlite
start type of steel and so the crack
will go in and it will stop alright if
this whole thing this whole blade was as
hard as the edge that crack will go
through and snap and so what it
generally does generally I'm not saying
autonomous can't snap into you they
absolutely can but generally by having
differential hardening it Katara's will
tend to bend instead of snapping into
that's the answer the problem is they
don't flex okay they are not Springs and
to get a spring the whole sword needs to
be about as hard as what the katana said
usually is martensite but then it needs
to be tempered which relieves some of
the stress and gives the sword
springiness now that type of steel is
what you'll find in the best quality
medieval European swords springiness see
the springiness of my sword and as a far
more springy up at the tip okay it's
made to do that because this is a
practice one all right that is purely
possible because the type of Steel that
this sword is made out of it is
martensite that has been properly
tempted to give it the springy quality
now if I did this if I flexed the katana
as much as I'm flexing this sword it
would stay that way it would Bend and
stay bent this is the truth about the
katana okay is that they are not as
durable as other swords but they are
generally far more resistant so here see
how easy it is to flex this saw this
much to flex the katana to that same
level I would need to apply far
more force so it is more resistant to
flexing it's more stiff the reason why
is more stiff it's because the stick up
do you see the thickness difference in
these sores I'll try and kind of turn
another thing it's if you can't see it
like a town huh that the tip is three
almost four mil at the tip compared to
this which is about one and a half to
two mil thick at the tip okay sorry
resistant of flexing capable flexing the
problem is when the katana does
eventually flex even though it takes
more force to flex when it does that's
gonna stay it's gonna stay Bend katanas
Bend they don't flex back unless they
made out a modest you a lot of modern
katana reproductions aren't made in the
traditional way they're made in this way
with spring steel because spring steel
is ultimately more durable so almost by
necessity katanas need to be thicker to
resist any bending because when it'll
Bend that that's where you're on into
troubles so to make it a balanced
functional sword a couple of things need
to be done the blade needs to be a bit
shorter because you're gonna have a
blade so thick at the tip if you have it
as long as a longsword it's gonna be way
too top-heavy say do you see the length
differences here between the katana and
longsword quite different in length too
top-heavy if you made a song having said
that there are katanas that are about as
long as a longer sword and they are
beastie choppers so they're not
completely unfunctional I think
generally they will have a bit of a you
know thinner tip but they won't be
nearly as nimble as long sword and it's
an interesting trade-off because this
long sword if it was sharp would have
nowhere near as much bite if you cut
with the tip as you can with a katana
see this is one of the adventures that
the katana gets remiz always a bit of a
trade-off with a katana being thick at
the top like this
it's chops are devastating even when you
strike at the top end and so even though
the katana is shorter than the longsword
okay to get a good effective really good
truck with this long sword you will need
a strike someone they aren't right here
on the blade but with the katana you can
actually get a good chop right at the
tip and you don't always need a aim
further down the blade and so in that
sense the katana still has decently good
chopping range but where the longsword
really excels at it's a
course in thrusting okay and having said
that if you try and chop someone you're
just out of range but the long side
because it's longer it's just in range
well you could still like slice
someone's throat open so even though the
longsword isn't as good we're chopping
at the tip it can still chop all right
so it's always a decent trade-off
between the two and remember the katana
isn't a horrible sword like I said at
the beginning I'm just trying to dispel
the misconceptions but one of his great
strengths is this cutting capacity and
it does get that because it's thick okay
and rigid and resistant to vibration
because of that one of the weaknesses
longsword in any sword that have you
know thinner blades on them is that
they're much more prone to vibration and
if you hit something with wrong edge
alignment they could vibrate and bounce
off or as the katana is particularly
resistant to that because it's thicker
so now I've addressed the overall
strength of the katana and the myth that
it's shock-absorbing because the
differential hardening no it's chocked
absorbent because it's thick all right
but yeah it's not gonna flex back so now
let's address one of the other myths is
that the curve assists with cutting
ratio and the answer is it doesn't it's
greatly got a curve okay not might like
it it's barely off straight now you can
get advantages in the cutting ratio if a
sword is more prominently curved like
you know say tall was the whole scimitar
kind of family of swords Pawar shamshir
those ones right and very prominently
curved okay then you can of course do
why draw cards but the type of draw cut
you can do with a katana you can do long
sword you can strike and draw in when
you're striking and you can also do push
cuts just as easily and remember the
katana Bailey has a curve it's barely
off straight and so the drawing motion
that you can get between a straight
sword and a katana doesn't change much
at all I tested this with a 3d model in
my katana series and the additional
cutting ratio is PIP so much so it's not
even worth mention a whole reason why
the katana has a curve is actually due
to the differential hardening process
okay because the back is thicker than
the edge there's more steel that wants
to contract when you quench the actual
blade and so that pulls the blade back
first it curves forward because this
cools down faster because the back cools
down slower then pulls it
and then the katana gets his natural
curve so it's purely from the
differential hiding but the thing is you
could still make a straight katana with
differential hardening if you started
with an inverse curve this is actually
proven in one of Alex Steel's videos
where he was trying to make a rapier and
I was he was trying to make it straight
and I was always curving to the side
because he I forget what he did with
that one specifically I think he did a
different pattern on one side he wanted
like a hamon line or something like that
and sorry to get the the rapier to
remain straight he needs to make an
inverse curve quench it and let the
cooling down straight pull it back into
straight and you can see look at that
that is some serious Bend and then up of
the tip like that's crazy crazy Bend
completely unacceptable it's still
bending I think that gap is still
increasing as it's cooling unbelievable
right
righty-ho we put a bend opposite to the
way that it warped itself as it did its
final part of the cooling it's still
just as curved I wonder if this time
however it will straight things crossed
all right let's have a look at this
thing but that is straightened No
so kept me down alright and sorry people
who made big time I could have made it
without the curve if they wanted to it
would be a lot more work so and because
the curve I mean it looks good and it
does have an advantage it certainly
doesn't harm its cutting ratio so
there's no real point in going to all
the work to make it straight and there
is an advantage and it's that the curve
makes it's kind of Auto correcting in
its edge alignment and it's simply
proven by this if I hold at the katana
like this and let it roll watch how it
rolls see that it'll roll into straight
and sorry if you strike something with a
katana and your edge alignment is off
and naturally when it hits because of
the curve wants to pull itself into
correct edge alignment and then go
through and then because it's also
resistant to vibration that enhances the
effect even more so and so the katana is
actually easy to cut with than other
swords does that make it better than
cutting you know in some instances okay
it doesn't mean it has the capacity to
cut through things that other swords
can't that doesn't have these properties
because all you need to do is strike
with good edge alignment and I'll go
through it means the katana is easier at
cutting and therefore it's easy to make
good cuts with but it doesn't mean that
it could always cut through things that
other swords that are good at cutting
but have more flex and aren't curved or
incapable of doing those swords to still
be able to cover the same thing you just
got to be good at it okay get good edge
alignment and then you'll be able to do
it so the katana in that sense is easier
to cut with and it's one of its
advantages okay cool you know a
mechanical kind of advantage to its
design katana is still a good sword okay
I'm just trying to debunk the bull trap
and also give it credit where it
deserves because there are some other
things that make the katana good at what
it does and I want address those right
now because I basically addressed all
the misconceptions okay it is not
sharper it is not stronger it doesn't
mean to that it's weaker is about the
same with certain strengths weaknesses
though it doesn't flex that's a problem
it's not wider it's not made out of
better steel on average and other swords
and the curve doesn't assist in its
cutting ratio but it is still good at
cutting and I've already addressed some
of the reasons why it's stiff it's
forgiving in the cut it has kind of an
auto
thing thing on on the edge alignment
rolls right into it and the other thing
is the fact that it has a single edge
now why does making it a single edge
make a good it's not inherently because
it's got a single edges that it's taking
advantage of one of the things you can
take advantage of with a single edge and
that is the length of the edge bevel
what do I mean I specifically mean the
length that you have between the very
end of the edge and the end of the bevel
itself so I see this from tip rides to
about there that's the actual length of
the edge bevel now compare that to
double bladed swords okay because you
need two edge bevels on the sword the
length of these edge bevels are much
shorter than the katana and so the
katana with having a longer edge bevel
that means it can have a smaller edge
itself like a more narrow finer edge
what do I mean a sort that has an edge
bevel like that is gonna cut far worse
than one that has something like that
this is a natural advantage that any
single edge sword can take advantage of
because it doesn't need to you know
shorten the edge bevel to fit another
edge on the back end so you can make the
edge bevel go all the way in
okay make it longer and every sword does
have a secondary bevel so when you're
looking at a blade okay
this is the edge bevel all right now the
secondary edge bevel is the final kind
of point where it comes in to the blade
so you got the normal edge bevel and
then right at the tip it kind of curves
off a bit more steeper right to the end
of the sword
every sword is going to have that no
matter how narrow it can but by the
design and age of the katana secondary
edge bevel is far more shallow than what
you'd have to do on a sword that has a
shorter edge bevel and so again because
that it has a very small secondary bevel
the angle of the edge could be far finer
okay doesn't mean it can be sharper but
it can get that advantage and still be
very robust with say again longsword
comparison or any sword that is double
bladed okay if you want an edge bevel to
be very narrow guess what it needs to be
because the edge bevel isn't as long it
needs to be thinner needs to be thinner
along that way because the more narrow
you make that edge okay this is the
middle of the sword were looking at more
narrow you make it the thinner the sword
needs to be and the thinner the sword
the more flex it'll have and that means
if your edge alignment is off you can
bounce right off the target but with
seeing
edged sword well you can get away with
having that narrow edge because this
bevel is longer and you still have a
thick blade as a result which makes it
very resistant to vibration and bouncing
of targets and so there we go these have
been the main misconceptions of the
katana and you know I think we covered
them all if I missed any do share them
in the comments below I look forward to
reading them I hope you have enjoyed and
of course I hope to see you in the next
video so until that time farewell
[Music]
you